So that's almost it for prototypes and constructor functions.
One thing we hadn't had a look at yet is how you can actually change the prototype of an object which
already was created or which you are not creating with your own constructor function.
So here for person for example, we clearly can set the prototype with person.prototype or to be precise,
we could set it to a new object or as we do it here, manipulate the default prototype
but what if you already have an object and you somehow want to change the prototype after it has been
created or you want to create a new object without your own constructor function for whichever reason
and you still want to set a different prototype.
Now let me make it clear that both cases are definitely niche use cases, very advanced use cases,
you might not encounter them every day but you will certainly find some scenarios where it can be useful
if you are able to change the prototype of an existing object or of an object which is not created with
one of your own constructors.
So let's have a look at that case here
and for that actually, I'll comment this here out just so that the console isn't cluttered too much and let's
create a new object here, maybe to mix things up,
name it
course. Now course is an object which I create here with the object literal notation, an alternative
would be to use new object, this built-in object constructor but I'll use the literal notation here and
now in there, let's say a course has a title, Javascript - The Complete Guide and also a rating which of
course is five here.
So that's my course
and now here, I want to call print rating.
Now that should output some information about the rating of the course,
unsurprisingly though if we reload, we just get an error that print rating is not a function because
it's clearly not a method defined on this object
and the prototype of this object also won't help us. If we comment this out for a second,
if we console log course.__proto so that we can have a look at the prototype
that is assigned here and we reload,
we see that is in the end prototype which has a constructor function, which has toString so it's that
default object.prototype thing we already learned about.
So that doesn't help us,
we would want to adjust that prototype and we want to do that after the object has been created because
it clearly has been created already.
We can do this with the object constructor function here, the global object constructor function
and there you have a get prototype and set prototype method.
Now let's first of all have a look at get prototype of and pass in the course and then let's console
log
the result of that,
just like that.
So now I'm using get prototype of of my course object.
If we reload, we get exactly the same output as before when we accessed __proto.
This __proto thing in the end is just an unofficial feature which was implemented
by all browsers actually but it's not really the way you're meant to work with prototypes in Javascript,
it's just due to the evolution of Javascript and that certain methods of interacting with prototypes weren't
always available, that we have this special __proto__property
which can be useful for looking into a prototype.
This here would be the more official way
but of course it's also a bit longer,
so you want to consider using that in code you write where you really need that logic as part of your
code execution.
If you just want to look into the prototype during development, definitely use __proto.
So that's get prototype of, more interesting for us here is clearly set prototype of.
This takes two parameters and the first one is the object where you want to set the prototype,
so my course object here, the second then is a prototype
you want to use and that's the interesting thing now.
Here you can override the prototype that has been assigned to an object after the object was created
and of course this works on any object, you can override the prototype of any object, including objects
that were created based on your own constructor function
and here for example we could then add a print rating method like this and there, output some string
here where we say this.rating and then maybe of five,
so /5 thereafter as a string and thereafter we'll see that this line should of course work because
we set the prototype of course to something new. If we now reload, this output works and we switched the
prototype.
If you would want to keep the original prototype and only add something to it, you could of course use
the spread operator here and access object get prototype
of course, this is a valid use case for the get prototype of method
now because this is not just some quick hack we're using to look into the prototype,
it'll be part of the code we shipped to our end users.
So here I get the current prototype, spread its properties into my new object which will be used as a
new prototype and then add my own print rating method.
So this would be a way of making this work whilst keeping the old prototype object functionality, though
it's also important to keep in mind that since we set the prototype to a new object, that new object which
we set as a prototype will have its own prototype which is also object.prototype.
So actually through that entire prototype chain,
we would have access to toString and so on even without that line here because this object which we
set as a new prototype will have that default object prototype itself
and we wouldn't be able to access anything on that prototype from our course object as well thanks to that
prototype chain where we always go to the next prototype in line
if we can't find a certain property or method on the given object.
So this is how we could set a prototype after the object has been created.
You can also set a prototype for an object which you are creating even if you're not creating it with
your own constructor function. For your own constructor function, you can adjust the prototype like this
here before you create your own objects.
Now if you for some reason don't want to use your own constructor function, you can also create let's
say a student object here, not with the object literal notation and also not with new object but instead
with a new way which I haven't showed you before where you use object.create.
This will actually also create a new object
basically just like this does it,
the object literal notation but with a twist.
Now object create takes a parameter and as you see, it takes an object as a parameter.
Now that's not the object with which it will initialize the object it creates, instead it will basically
create an empty object. The object you pass here as a parameter will be set as a prototype for this initial
object.
So here we could add let's say a printProgress
function where I console log this.progress,
clearly a property which I haven't added anymore and now if we console log student, you'll see that
if we reload this application,
student is an empty object but it has a prototype which has a printProgress method.
So the object you pass to create is set as a prototype for the empty object object
create creates
otherwise. If you then would want to add something to that object, you can do that by using the dot notation
here of course,
for example, a name Max or of course also with the defined property method we already learned about earlier
in the course where you can add a property to an object,
so to student here, let's say the progress property which you then also can configure with such a descriptor
object, where you have configurable, maybe set this to true, enumerable maybe set this to true, a value
of let's say 0.8 to have 80% progress kind of and then also here writable, maybe set this
to false, whatever you want.
So these are different ways of adding properties to an empty object,
the important thing is that object it creates does create such an empty object but it does create it with
a prototype of your choice. Side note, object.create also takes a second argument which would take such
a property descriptor map where you then also could add properties like that in the creation process
if you want to create a non-empty object,
so let me comment that out, here in this object descriptor map
you could also add properties like name and then have an object for every property you want to have added
to this newly created object where here, each object has to describe a property exactly like we do
it down there.
So here you can also add configurable false or maybe true, enumerable true, value Max, the value for the
name property will be Max and writable true.
So that's an alternative to that and thereafter I'll comment that back in so that we also have a progress
and these are simply different ways of creating objects,
obviously not always the ways you will use all the time because they're a bit more complex but they
also give you more features therefore, more flexibility, more power and hence you should definitely be
aware of this object creation methods as well and of objects created in specific because it allows you
to create an object with a different but the default prototype assigned right from the start.
So now just to verify that everything works,
let's reload this and we output the progress here and we see this is the object that was created.
So that is all working
and with that, we learned a lot about prototypes and objects and how to create objects I guess.